I had two fathers, a rich one and a poor one. One was highly educated and
intelligent; he had a Ph.D. and completed four years of undergraduate work in
less than two years. He then went on to Stanford University, the University of
Chicago, and Northwestern University to do his advanced studies, all on full
financial scholarships. The other father never finished the eighth grade.
Both men were successful in their careers, working hard all their lives.
Both earned substantial incomes. Yet one struggled financially all his life. The
other would become one of the richest men in Hawaii. One died leaving tens of
millions of dollars to his family, charities and his church. The other left
bills to be paid.
Both men were strong, charismatic and influential. Both men offered me
advice, but they did not advise the same things. Both men believed strongly in
education but did not recommend the same course of study.
If I had had only one dad, I would have had to accept or reject his advice.
Having two dads advising me offered me the choice of contrasting points of view;
one of a rich man and one of a poor man.
Instead of simply accepting or rejecting one or the other, I found myself
thinking more, comparing and then choosing for myself.
The problem was, the rich man was not rich yet and the poor man not yet
poor. Both were just starting out on their careers, and both were struggling
with money and families. But they had very different points of view about the
subject of money.
For example, one dad would say, "The love of money is the root of all
evil." The other, "The lack of money is the root of all evil."
As a young boy, having two strong fathers both influencing me was
difficult. I wanted to be a good son and listen, but the two fathers did not say
who controls the past controls the future, who controls the present controls the past.
the same things. The contrast in their points of view, particularly where money
was concerned, was so extreme that I grew curious and intrigued. I began to
start thinking for long periods of time about what each was saying.
Much of my private time was spent reflecting, asking myself questions such
as, "Why does he say that?" and then asking the same question of the other dad's
statement. It would have been much easier to simply say, "Yeah, he's right. I
agree with that." Or to simply reject the point of view by saying, "The old man
doesn't know what he's talking about." Instead, having two dads whom I loved
forced me to think and ultimately choose a way of thinking for myself. As a
process, choosing for myself turned out to be much more valuable in the long run,
rather than simply accepting or rejecting a single point of view.
One of the reasons the rich get richer, the poor get poorer, and the
middle class struggles in debt is because the subject of money is taught at home,
not in school. Most of us learn about money from our parents. So what can a poor
parent tell their child about money? They simply say "Stay in school and study
hard." The child may graduate with excellent grades but with a poor person's
financial programming and mind-set. It was learned while the child was young.
Money is not taught in schools. Schools focus on scholastic and
professional skills, but not on financial skills. This explains how smart
bankers, doctors and accountants who earned excellent grades in school may still
struggle financially all of their lives. Our staggering national debt is due in
large part to highly educated politicians and government officials making
financial decisions with little or no training on the subject of money.
I often look ahead to the new millennium and wonder what will happen when
we have millions of people who will need financial and medical assistance. They
will be dependent on their families or the government for financial support.
What will happen when Medicare and Social Security run out of money? How will a
nation survive if teaching children about money continues to be left to parentsmost of whom will be, or already are, poor?
Because I had two influential fathers, I learned from both of them. I had
to think about each dad's advice, and in doing so, I gained valuable
insight into the power and effect of one's thoughts on one's life. For
example, one dad had a habit of saying, "I can't afford it." The other dad
forbade those words to be used. He insisted I say, "How can I afford it?" One is
a statement, and the other is a question. One lets you off the hook, and the
other forces you to think. My soon-to-be-rich dad would explain that by
automatically saying the words "I can't afford it," your brain stops working. By
asking the question "How can I afford it?" your brain is put to work. He did not
who controls the past controls the future, who controls the present controls the past.
mean buy everything you wanted. He was fanatical about exercising your mind, the
most powerful computer in the world. "My brain gets stronger every day because I
exercise it. The stronger it gets, the more money I can make." He believed that
automatically saying "I can't afford it" was a sign of mental laziness.
Although both dads worked hard, I noticed that one dad had a habit of
putting his brain to sleep when it came to money matters, and the other had a
habit of exercising his brain. The long-term result was that one dad grew
stronger financially and the other grew weaker. It is not much different from a
person who goes to the gym to exercise on a regular basis versus someone who
sits on the couch watching television. Proper physical exercise increases your
chances for health, and proper mental exercise increases your chances for wealth.
Laziness decreases both health and wealth.
My two dads had opposing attitudes in thought. One dad thought that the
rich should pay more in taxes to take care of those less fortunate. The other
said, "Taxes punish those who produce and reward those who don't produce."
One dad recommended, "Study hard so you can find a good company to work
for." The other recommended, "Study hard so you can find a good company to buy."
One dad said, "The reason I'm not rich is because I have you kids." The
other said, "The reason I must be rich is because I have you kids."
One encouraged talking about money and business at the dinner ,table. The
other forbade the subject of money to be discussed over a meal.
One said, "When it comes to money, play it safe, don't take risks." The
other said, "Learn to manage risk."
One believed, "Our home is our largest investment and our greatest asset."
The other believed, "My house is a liability, and if your house is your largest
investment, you're in trouble."
Both dads paid their bills on time, yet one paid his bills first while the
other paid his bills last.
One dad believed in a company or the government taking care of you and
your needs. He was always concerned about pay raises, retirement plans, medical
benefits, sick leave, vacation days and other perks. He was impressed with two
of his uncles who joined the military and earned a retirement and entitlement
package for life after twenty years of active service. He loved the idea of
medical benefits and PX privileges the military provided its retirees. He also
loved the tenure system available through the university. The idea of job
protection for life and job benefits seemed more important, at times, than the
job. He would often say, "I've worked hard for the government, and I'm entitled
to these benefits."
who controls the past controls the future, who controls the present controls the past.
The other believed in total financial self-reliance. He spoke out against
the "entitlement" mentality and how it was creating weak and financially needy
people. He was emphatic about being financially competent.
One dad struggled to save a few dollars. The other simply created
investments.
One dad taught me how to write an impressive resume so I could find a good
job. The other taught me how to write strong business and financial plans so I
could create jobs.
Being a product of two strong dads allowed me the luxury of observing the
effects different thoughts have on one's life. I noticed that people really do
shape their life through their thoughts.
For example, my poor dad always said, "I'll never be rich." And that
prophesy became reality. My rich dad, on the other hand, always referred to
himself as rich. He would say things like, "I'm a rich man, and rich people
don't do this." Even when he was flat broke after a major financial setback, he
continued to refer to himself as a rich man. He would cover himself by saying,
"There is a difference between being poor and being broke. - Broke is temporary,
and poor is eternal."
My poor dad would also say, "I'm not interested in money," or "Money
doesn't matter." My rich dad always said, "Money is power."
The power of our thoughts may never be measured or appreciated, but it
became obvious to me as a young boy to be aware of my thoughts and how I
expressed myself. I noticed that my poor dad was poor not because of the amount
of money he earned, which was significant, but
because of his thoughts and actions. As a young boy, having two fathers, I
became acutely aware of being careful which thoughts I chose to adopt as my own.
Whom should I listen to-my rich dad or my poor dad?
Although both men had tremendous respect for education and learning, they
disagreed in what they thought was important to learn. One wanted me to study
hard, earn a degree and get a good job to work for money. He wanted me to study
to become a professional, an attorney or an accountant or to go to business
school for my MBA. The other encouraged me to study to be rich, to understand
how money works and to learn how to have it work for me. "I don't work for
money!" were words he would repeat over and over, "Money works for me!"
At the age of 9, I decided to listen to and learn from my rich dad about
money. In doing so, I chose not to listen to my poor dad, even though he was the
one with all the college degrees.
who controls the past controls the future, who controls the present controls the past.
A Lesson From Robert Frost
Robert Frost is my favourite poet. Although I love many of his poems, my
favorite is The Road Not Taken. I use its lesson almost daily:
The Road Not Taken
Two roads diverged in a yellow wood, And sorry I could not travel both And
be one traveler, long I stood And looked down one as far as I could To where it
bent in the undergrowth;
Then took the other, as just as fair, And having perhaps the better claim,
Because it was grassy and wanted wear Though as for that the passing there Had
worn them really about the same,
And both that morning equally lay In leaves no step had trodden black. Oh,
I kept the first for another day! Yet knowing how way leads onto way, I doubted
if I should ever come back.
I shall be telling this with a sigh Somewhere ages and ages hence; Two
roads diverged in a wood, and I took the one less traveled by, And that has made
all the difference.
Robert Frost(1916)
And that made all the difference.
Over the years, I have often reflected upon Robert Frost's poem. Choosing
not to listen to my highly educated dad's advice and attitude about money was a
painful decision, but it was a decision that shaped the rest of my life.
Once I made up my mind whom to listen to, my education about money began.
My rich dad taught me over a period of 30 years, until I was age 39. He stopped
once he realized that I knew and fully understood what he had been trying to
drum into my often thick skull.
Money is one form of power. But what is more powerful is financial
education. Money comes and goes, but if you have the education about how money
works, you gain power over it and can begin building wealth. The reason positive
thinking alone does not work is because most people went to school and never
learned how money works, so they spend their lives working for money.
Because I was only 9 years old when I started, the lessons my rich dad
taught me were simple. And when it was all said and done, there were only six
main lessons, repeated over 30 years. This book is about those six lessons, put
as simply as possible as my rich dad put forth those lessons to me. The lessons
who controls the past controls the future, who controls the present controls the past.
are not meant to be answers but guideposts. Guideposts that will assist you and
your children to grow wealthier no matter what happens in a world of increasing
change and uncertainty.
Lesson #1 The Rich Don't Work for Money
Lesson #2 Why Teach Financial Literacy?
Lesson #3 Mind Your own Business
Lesson #4 The History of Taxes and the
Lesson #5 The Rich Invent Money
Lesson #6 Work to Learn Don't Work for Money